So if we look at different strategies
that exist at accelerator probing for
something beyond standard model.
So if you take at look at this picture,
the horizontal axis,
there is energy scale that
responds to mass of the particle.
And there is a vertical axis that is
interaction strength of the particle.
There is a region that is very well
studied and there is no new physics,
no dark matter,
everything populated by standard model.
And there are two directions
that may give us a hint about
presence of something new.
So one direction is so
called Energy Frontier.
So the hypotheses are, there are particles
really heavy, really massive and
to get to those region we need to
produce collision with higher energy
and this is actually the strategy that
large hadron collider follows for years.
And there is alternative direction
that is called intensity frontier that
suggests that there are weakly interacting
particles like neutrinos or something else
that their probability of interaction
with our regular matter is really low.
To get the hints of such directions,
we need to produce a very big amount
of regular particles like neutrinos,
to estimate proportions or estimate
the properties of those particles.
So one of the hypotheses that
explains the nature of dark matter
is called very
Weakly Interacting Massive Particles.
Those can be mediators of dark matter or
even dark matter particles themselves.
So it's just a small segment
in the plenitude of different
models that try to explain
what Dark Matter consist of,
naturally it is not
very remodel dependent.
It just says that, okay, we are looking
for something that has mass and
certain range and that interacts with
regular matter with certain probabilities.
Actually, you can follow the reference
links to get more details about
those physics.
But let's look at
the CERN Accelerator Complex and
see that there is room for
many more accelerators and
many more experiments than we described or
we used to think.
We describe it the first time.
So besides prominent CMS, LHCb,
ATLAS and ALICE there are places or
accelerators that are somehow
attached to different detectors.
And if we're looking for
place where intensity
of a beam can reach really high values,
it is so-called SBS ring
that accelerates protons
before they get to a large
hadron collider ring.
It is colored by blue on this picture.
And there is so-called north
area where beam goes to,
and the plan is to build
an experiment there that
will be looking for dark matter particles.
There is a proposed experiment that is
called search for hidden particles.
You see the design of this experiment and
the picture and
it is of essentially light dark
matter search experiment and
the data taking is expected
to start in 2025 plus.
So here is a principal
design of the experiment.
So the beam of protons comes from
the left and hits a massive target.
And the sensitive part of this experiment,
allocated in the middle,
you see it is depicted by grey something,
and
another sensitive part is located
at the most downstream region.
It is depicted by the green tracker.
Those two elements
are actually looking for
weakly interacting particles following
those strategies I mentioned before.
This grey thing is called emulsion and
a target, lead target, that looks for
electron trajectory scattered by dark
matter particles hitting those atoms,
hitting atoms of lead.
It is so-called direct interaction.
And another sensitive part of
the experiment is located downstream.
So presumably a dark matter particle
flies through the detector and
somewhere in this red volume,
it decays into a normal particle that
we can detect like a muon and a pion.
So we can reconstruct
trajectories of those particles
using tracker techniques,
we mentioned at the previous lecture.
And if we'll construct the vertex
those two particles and
its located inside this volume of decay,
then,
we can deduce the probability of being
such particle, an example of dark matter.
So it is the second search
strategy that is called indirect.
So of course, we have to be able to
protect the volume of direct and
indirect sensitive parts from a vast
amount of regular particles like muons and
that's why this blue
thing is sitting between the beam and
the sensitive element.
It is so-called magnetic muon-shield
that is supposed to deflect or
absorb as much as possible the radiation of muons or
other hadrons coming from the target.
So SHiP experiment has very rich
scientific physics problem.
Such for hidden sector portals,
tau neutrino physics or
light dark matter search.
Of course,
there are engineering challenges.
For example, how can you design
such a shield that it will be
as efficient as possible with
a given amount of particles or
given energies that we
expect to get from the beam.
And machine learning challenges
are ranging from experiment design,
including shield optimization,
emulsion tracker,
emulsion-sensitive detector optimization,
tracker optimization.
So with the respect to sensitivity and
cost,
also fast simulation and
fast data processing and
the most important part is separation
of signal, that comes from
dark metal particles and direction,
from the background that we are aware of.
So what kind of light dark
matter signal can look like?
So here is a final diagram of dark
matter particle X scattering on
electron of lead nuclei.
And the boost the electron get,
it get transferred for
the volume of the detector.
And there is so-called
electromagnetic shower that
is produced after such interaction.
So the hint or the very distinct
feature that we will be looking for
inside of detector volume
is such air shower.
So here is an example of a shower produced
by an electron with a certain energy.
So every track here, very short track,
is recorded by a very sensitive
element that is called emulsion.
We'll talk about it a little bit later.
But first, let's take a look at
how background can look like.
So here, we can see various
types of interaction that
come through neutrino in
directing with nuclei, or
in directing with atomic electrons.
So the first type of interaction is
called quasi-elastic scattering.
It is depicted at the left
part of the slide.
So when neutrino interacts with a neutron,
it also produces an electron
that get boosted.
And at the same time,
a neutrino transforms into a proton.
So there is also an electromagnetic
shower produced as well,
there is a trajectory of a single
proton that can be found.
And if we measured it, it could be a good
sign that it was a neutrino interaction,
not dark matter interaction.
Also, there is deep inelastic scattering,
it is depicted at the bottom.
This is a little more complicated
because in addition to
the electromagnetic shower and
proton, we also get an hadron shower.
And the most difficult type of
background is called elastic
scattering on electron which
looks topologically the same as
our signal because we also have
electromagnetic shower, and
we have a neutrino that is not leaving
any traces in volume of our detector.
So it looks like just electromagnetic
shower flying out of nowhere.
But the thing is, we can look at
the energy and angle distribution
to see if there are some differences
between those two patterns.
So signal/background separation
strategy falls the following guideline.
It starts with discovery
of electromagnetic shower
in the volume of our detector.
Then for background,
the final state is a little bit different,
because we expect to find a proton or
a hadron jet that gives us hint
that it was in directional neutrino
instead of that meta particle.
And for the case when we don't have
different particles in the final state,
we can compare energy-angle
correlation of the detected electron
to discriminate very weakly
directing massive particle
against neutrino because those
masses should be different.
And to get information about
trajectories of subatomic particles,
we have to use very
precise detector material.
[MUSIC]